I'm merely referring to these two women as representing sort of two sides of the coin, like Punch and Columbine.
They're an act, to my mind, and an act of relentless self-promoters.
And...
But it's distressing to see the audience which they reach.
You know, something like The Book Collector, we should perhaps get a little ice for that.
Something like The Book Collector has been, it's got a subscription rate of, I mean, a subscription list of 1,500, 1,700.
You look at the Papers of the Book of the Society of America, 1,500 copies.
I mean, these are just miserably small amounts.
The Book Collector advertising, not that I advertise, I mean, I would advertise if I ever decided to promote myself.
value for money, you're only reaching 1,500 people, but they are the right 1,500, and yet Nichols Barker can't charge any more than a certain amount for an ad there, because he's only got this miserable subscription rate.
I mean, it's value for money compared to Biblio, which I think is a despicable rag, which I know you write for.
They charge this immense amount of money, and what are you reaching?
You're reaching just the
If you want to sell books to stupid people, it's a great way to do it.
But I view that as a con game.
And the booksellers who are thinking, you know, it's the Internet marketing, this reaching out.
The AB is constantly wringing its hands about how can we make book collecting more appealing.
You know, there's no point in making book collecting more appealing.
There are always a small fit but few.
And why should you, is it really...
It reminds me of these National Library Week things where getting people out to read.
I mean, there are people who like to read, there are people who don't.
I don't think you should keep people in willful illiteracy because, of course, especially if you have a democracy, they damn well better be able to read the ballot.
They ought to be able to read a newspaper or inquire some information, although they have no critical judgment to judge.
And, you know, you look at these ballot measures, which are just, you know, it's all in legalese.
No one can be expected to do that sort of thing.
But beyond that,
Those people who actually want to read books, I'm not out to promote more reading.
It's one of the problems with Chernofsky's AB, which again, I mean, that's even crappier than Biblio.
It's complete, well, he's going to go bankrupt because, of course, he's been greedy.
His big mistake is charging much too much money for his advertisements there.
But people who use the computers now, they have put him out of business.
Exactly, they're going to put him out, but it's partly his own fault that people got used to him.
I mean, it's so cheap.
You look at the British one, the book dealer, vastly better done, actual information of real value to booksellers written by intelligent people.
And they charge, I think that's like a quarter of what Chernofsky does to advertise.
And it's a convenient little thing that you can carry.
I mean, there will still be the quoters, the sort of my quoters who buy something at a garage sale and have 500 or 1,000 books and read through it.
the thing, and those people won't be affected, but Chernovsky has priced those people out of the market.
Those people, of course, I've talked to some of them, they think Chernovsky is just this quack for, you know, he believes that any book, well, this is, I mean, not to say, I don't take this as an anti-Semitic remark, but there is the Jewish people of the book feeling.
If you look at uncritical adulation of the book, it is something, possibly to the credit of Jewish people brought up, they cannot throw out a book
And many another person finds it a little easier to throw it at a book.
Now that's an admirable thing as far as, the Chinese are the same way.
Any little scrap of book with writing on it floating across the street as a rag is a precious relic.
That's an admirable thing.
It helps for the conservation book.
What it isn't admirable for is critical judgment of books.
To Chernovsky, all books are equal, getting the right book to the right person at the right time.
Chernovsky is not a, he's probably the stupidest person in the book of trade.
Well, I never remember.
I've got to see the lucubraceous stuff that he writes there.
I mean, he's a total idiot.
He has no judgment about game or anyone else.
I mean, I'm one of the few people who actually reads the stuff.
I'm stopping my subscription, though, because time is too... Yeah, it's just a complete waste of time.
Cheers.
Thank you.
But if he had more discrimination, as, say, somebody like Nicholas Parker or Arthur Freeman does, you would have...
Yes, we get this from our next-door neighbor, another reason for living cheaply.
Her father has seven chateaus.
Really?
It's very nice.
Well, this is their cheapest, poorest wine.
That's another, I should have actually told you, the one further ingredient when I told you I sold books in completely the wrong way.
To my mind, I try to pay my expenses and buy a few books for myself.
That's the summit of my ambition.
I'm not trying to have an enormous, wonderful stock.
But you have a family to support.
Well, yeah.
Yeah, she illustrates books.
We didn't formally... I'm Anne Arnold.
No, you probably... Peter showed you Ranjit Sinji at Serendipity, the children's book.
She illustrated that, but she's also illustrated books for HarperCollins and Fanny at Chez Fun East.
There's a restaurant around the corner.
So she does make some modest amount of money, but again, she's a grossly underpaid...
She spends too much time on her paintings.
If you look at her paintings after she spent two days on it, it's still underpainting.
It looks like much of the finished stuff that sold
by people.
So she's ridiculously uneconomical.
But the great advantage of living in California, which I despise for low-grade intellectual surroundings, the only good thing is the library, and it's going down the drain.
Ever since I got my NUC, I hardly need to go up to the library.
I used to go every day for two or three hours.
Now it's maybe twice a week.
How many libraries is that NUC, by the way?
756.
You have 756 libraries?
I had to rebuild the bookcases to fit them.
That ensured that I did put it in my catalog before I picked it up, and I felt no one wanted to buy it.
I would rebuild the bookcases so that I could never put anything else on it, so I'd never be still subject to a temptation to... It's not only Berkeley that has it, the Graduate Theological Union is still in Five Block Walk, has another set.
So, although now, with Reconstruction, you can't get to the public NUC.
They've closed down the reference room for the last... What's going on up there?
I'm trying to get a handle on this.
The library is completely gone to shift.
Why?
Well, lack of money, lack of... I know Peter Lyman, who I talked to yesterday.
Do you like some of everything?
I don't know.
I won't be shy.
Why do they say lack of money?
Well, they claim lack of money, which is true.
But it's also that this post, I mean, nowadays you catalog with computers and you have people who don't know anything.
There are people like Tony Bliss up there who do still know something.
If you have a rare book blogger, he's, you know, don't quote me, he's totally burnt out, obviously.
I mean, he's just... He won't admit it, though.
I will shut the machine up at this point.
Well, Hallow had a... the esprit de corps that Hallow was capable of creating was really remarkable.
He made... He would say to people as they went off on the... Yes, Jennifer Larson even quotes... Now, Jennifer Larson and I do have a dislike, but she's got John Warren Hallow on her brain, and has a completely uncritical view of the fellow.
She even prints... It's sad, in a way.
It is sad.
She... you know, Hallow with his... Let's admit that he got a stolen book.
Yeah, yeah.
But she closed and says, I think it's in the thing put out by the Gleason in San Francisco, the USF, where she says, yes, when he gave her her first auction commission, she went off, he said to her, never forget who you are and who you represent.
I mean, this is like being somebody sent off to... Like a kamikaze mission.
Yeah, and it's just that she could print this without seeing if she ever stand back and think,
What will another person think when they read this?
And Howell had that.
He was a very polished... You know, he had an excellent bookshop.
He was sort of charismatic.
Yeah, charismatic person.
I mean, between womanizing on the one hand... See, that's the thing with her.
Obviously, there's the librarian in Jennifer, and she... This esprit de corps, they really do believe, and you can still know, you've seen that thing, the consanguineous tree?
that Jennifer Larson and John Clayton did after Howell's death, which shows there's a tree with John Howell at the bottom, then Warren Howell, and everybody who ever worked there, including people who lasted only two days or were fired.
Jeremy is a little more, although some people say unkind things about him.
I've always gotten along with him, and I think there is... I'm actually rather sympathetic to Jeremy Norman, although he's completely the reverse sort of bookseller that I would choose to do.
He does realize that there's another world out there.
There are many people who are so locked into printing in the mind of man, Garrison, Morton, great books, they really don't have a sense of it.
Jeremy does know, he knows how ignorant he is in many ways.
And there is a, you know, he makes occasional arrogant statement in his catalog prefaces, but there is an element to him that isn't present in many other history of science.
History of science is a bad thing.
It does bad things to people, I think.
But at any rate, the consanguinistry, yes, all those people.
If you look at them, some of them are perfectly nice people.
Others are rather insufferable.
They've all still there some slight vestige of what Howell did to them.
The esprit de corps, they believe that other people who didn't go through the Howell training can't collate a book.
I mean, in the back of their mind, there's that feeling about it.
And, well, here's an excellent idea which you can list, which I think is a very characteristic.
I can or can't?
You can.
Oh, you can.
This thing is well worth quoting.
I won't say which Howells staff member it was, but this to me is the quintessence of Howells.
I was there.
I was probably just a student.
This was probably 1971 or something.
You were there.
You worked there.
No, no, no, no, no.
I was in the Howells shop browsing around when a customer came in.
There was always, Howells was very well staffed.
Lots and lots of people.
And one of these people, always very well dressed, and I've been giving a whole air that, you know, this is money here, and, you know, you need that to induce people.
I mean, many a wealthy person, well, my catalogs look just like type.
They are just, they're on a, they're just typewritten things.
So you don't, people who want it actually to look like printing are going to think there's something suspicious or wrong here, or the price is too wrong.
It can't be any good because it's only $75.
Howell had the mark, he was a superb marketer.
I mean, everything, as what,
Book-selling, not the sort of book-selling I-esteem, but book-selling within the AVAA mode.
Howell's a master practitioner.
And anyway, he taught these people quite well.
So somebody comes in.
You know, tourists would come in.
It was right next to Union Square.
And they do have an ability, which I would be unwilling to have, of being quite nice to total yokels and hicks and people who don't know anything but who may have money, you know, piles of Oklahoma oil money, but can hardly or mispronounce things.
This person came in and asked, do you have any Bibles?
And, well, of course they have Bibles.
Bibles are very collectible.
In fact, John Howell, Warren Howell's father, gave, had a big Bible collection which he gave to the theological union.
They were very, they're devout something or others, I think, Episcopalians.
And this person asked, do you have any Bibles?
And the employee took him over and showed him, they had a,
original edition of Erasmus' Greek New Testament, which is a monument.
I think it is imprinting in the mind of men.
It ought to be.
And the person looked at it.
And you know, many a collector who couldn't read the Greek would buy this.
Norman Strauss, for instance, would have bought something like this, even though he can't read any foreign language.
Does that offend you, by the way, if somebody buys a book that they can't read?
No, no.
But people who, no, it's only when they become a poser.
You know, I have books in languages.
I have a book on Neolatin versifiers in Czechoslovakia, a Czech book.
Barney Rosenthal has this also, and he said, you know, I see you've got the only other copy in California.
I keep telling myself I shouldn't have books in languages I can't read.
And Barney reads more languages than I do.
But it's, of course, it's just a reference book.
I would not have a book of Czech literature on my shelves.
However, this is Neo-Latin poetry, and you've got the titles in Latin.
You've got the account, and it's a schematic thing where you can figure out and check what they're... You know, I have a Danish biograph.
Let me share.
You can sort of take the Danish as being German, and you can figure out birth and death dates.
And many a bookseller uses things like the Biographie Universelle.
I mean, the biggest universal biographies are both in French, and even if you don't know French, you do have to use them, but you can use them because they're very schematic.
So I don't... It's just these people who try to promote...
I guess I would say this applies to Einstein off-prints, where they have a totally artificially inflated value to my mind, which is, and a lot of people don't read the German, very few people do read German, particularly among science book collectors, or there's things, the thing on non-Euclidean mathematics, things published on Gary, all of these Central European things.
You can take it for granted that a person probably knows French.
In the old days, it was the polite accomplishment of
Beyond that, what's the point of somebody having a three-page thing?
It doesn't so much offend me with the Einstein because it's been reprinted and collected papers, but there are things that are out there in the hands of ignorant collectors that could be in the hands of someone who can actually use it.
And I guess I feel that if you learn some obscure language, you might perhaps have the concomitant benefit of spending five years that the books in that language will be cheap.
And you can have, therefore, a very good collection of Czechoslovakian literature because you can buy it.
Well, in this country, Swedish literature would be an excellent example.
There are a lot of emigrants.
There are Swedish books, particularly in Minnesota, are fairly common.
The next generation doesn't know it.
If you still know Swedish, you can buy Swedish books through almost nothing.
And it seems to me that's a sensible area of collecting if you happen to learn such things.
What I object to is in the—this is very common in history of science—the
notion that intellectual value is somehow measurable in financial terms.
And this is totally different from English literature, which used to be the great collecting.
I mean, the days of the early collectors and the early chapters of your things on from
you know, dipped into Huntington.
It's all monuments of English literature.
It's famous things that Huntington may well have read a little Shakespeare.
He may well have read a little Tennessee.
I don't think he read any of it.
Well, but he might.
He probably knew a line or two of quotation from Shakespeare.
At any rate, it wasn't inconceivable that he could have read Shakespeare, so you don't spot him immediately as a poser because he's got something on non-Euclidean geometry in Czech on his shelves.
So, um...
I just think it's bad for humans to attempt to pretend to more learning than they have.
And the ABA, the whole code of book collecting, has forced people into this mode.
I collect Nabokov, so I have to have his early things.
Of course you have to have the early things, but of course no one reads Russian who collects Nabokov largely.
and you're forced into this false position.
I always think that's bad for people, because it's like Haven O'More.
It leads them to lie.
Look at the Haven O'More thing.
He was selling these books, and yet the entire globe at the back... A little tip.
A little tip.
What to do.
Well, you know, we can talk later.
He's not going to be here for all that long.
And you can give me advice, and then I can tell other people about it.
Haven O'More, the whole thing about how, you know, this is the library for the heavenly city, and yet it's being sold.
This contradiction is never addressed.
But it's this great poser.
Anyway.
Get back to the Bible.
Get back to the Bible, exactly.
There's the Greek Bible.
So he's got this in this Erasmus New Testament.
And the fellow looks at it.
And, well, he doesn't read Greek.
And he wants something the folks back home can, you know.
So he says, don't you have anything in English?
Well, he obviously might well have bought a first edition of the King's James Bible.
A perfectly worthy, antiquarian thing.
Wouldn't have disgraced the shelves of Powell's.
They didn't happen to have one at the time.
They finished showing him what they had in Greek, and when he said, don't you have anything in English, the fellow drew himself up.
He drew himself up in this typical Howell fashion and said, at Howells, they always identified himself at Howells, at Howells, we don't deal much in translations.
And I felt, you know, of all things to say, if he'd asked for Nabokov first editions, and they didn't have the Russians, they only offered them the Russians to ask them, I do.
But the King James Bible, and the King James Bible has had more influence on English civilization than the Greek Testament ever has.
The only work of art ever produced by a committee, I think.
So it was the mot injuste for absolutely, if you couldn't have picked a wronger book to say it up, that to me summarizes the ethos that Hallow instilled in his people, which I, of course, as I've said, despise.
How do you respond to somebody like Herbert Tentured?
Is that Tentured?
Tentured?
I hardly do or know anything about manuscripts.
They're very fancy catalogs.
I really don't know.
I certainly will in my Parnassi Reticule.
Well, I think I may even have a rhyme somewhere else.
People like the Sourges.
I do despise the Sourges.
But, of course, everyone despises his associates.
They're even below booksellers because they know even they're more, obviously, money-grubbing than... Most booksellers try to pretend that, although they're not advertising them as investments necessarily, at least in print, they try to pretend that we love the book.
And I think they really do.
Even Chernofsky, he loves the book.
He's a total idiot.
But he does like the book.
And it's personally possible he could be writing an in-house magazine for...
Edmond Scientific Company.
I was talking about the Sourges.
Sourges, yes, the Sourges.
Patrick and Elisabeth Sourges.
What, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what, what,
No, he's once said to somebody, you know it, Papa, that stupid person, we're going to damn him to hell.
We're going to write a Claire Hugh about it.
He actually wrote a Claire Hugh about Rob Rulon Miller, which is this.
This was about a year and a half ago.
He was tired of hearing my Claire Hughes.
He said, Rob Rulon Miller is getting stiller and stiller.
Sooner or later, he was eaten by an alligator, which has the lack of
Rob's the only person who's been done twice by my clarities.
I should also point out, I won't name the names of the school.
Now, why is Rob... I've never met him, by the way.
I think Rob's a perfectly fine person.
And actually, they aren't offensive.
No, neither of them are offensive to Rob.
Actually, in spite of my opinions I've given you now are fairly unbuttoned.
I wouldn't dream of... You know, to write them out indicates a degree of...
You know, if these things were said by almost anyone else in the book trade, there would be an agenda behind them.
To me, although I am a bookseller, I don't buy from these people.
I'm a disinterested observer.
I know most of these people, but I don't make deals with them.
I'm a distant observer.
So there's no axe to grind here.
You know, I simply look at a person as what they pretend to be, what they put out officially in print, their catalogs, for instance.
And I see, I mean, Nicholas Markin does the same thing in his funny catalogs every couple of years.
I mean, there are these people who make ridiculous mistakes, and they're pillory, I think, in a perfectly gentle way.
I mean, not everyone knows everything.
Some people are more willfully ignorant than others.
That's another objection I have to many a bookseller.
It's not merely...
ignorance because everyone can't know everything it's willful ignorance because you will note I buy most of my books from other booksellers that's the cheapest way to get them I get a few things privately but I always pay too much if I buy privately it's much cheaper to buy it from a bookseller and that's also a clean transaction if you actually know a book is worth X number of dollars you're obliged to pay a certain percentage of X to the person whereas if a bookseller has already priced it you buy it at that minus 10 or 20 percent and there's no you haven't cheated anyone
But there are, and this is fairly, again, I won't name names, there are booksellers who I think are deliberately ignorant.
What they do is they buy the book and they can shrug their shoulders.
You know, you know that in their heart of hearts they have a bit of a notion that this book printed in such and such a year and such and such a place.
It sends signals to them, possibly even finger spits into you, that it might be worth something.
But
I don't know.
So they'll buy it for, let us say, $25.
They don't want to pay too much for it, so I'll buy a safe sum.
It's always incredibly small, $25.
They then go home.
It wouldn't be fair to the customer if I didn't put a fair price on it.
And so they go and look it up heavily and discover it's worth $1,000.
And, of course, they don't go back to the... In the honest thing, if you're completely ignorant...
and you're buying a single book, which seems to be of some value, is to say, well, I looked this up.
It could be worth $50.
It could be worth $3,000.
Give me a day or two, and I'll find out.
But there are a number of booksellers, and I'm not saying that it is when you've got a huge library, this possibly isn't practical, or they've brought them over the counter, and they've got to leave right then.
I'm not saying.
But there are certainly people who seem to know an enormous amount about their book after it's been priced, and they know absolutely nothing beforehand.
There's a bookseller...
Well, some local men.
There are some local men.
No, I think it's a fairly common phenomenon.
I think the person honestly ought to say, well, a place like Moe's.
I think they know a good bit about certain sorts of books and not a lot about others, but they buy at a certain rate and sell at a certain rate.
Moe's.
It's just a typical second-hand bookstore, a very well-run second-hand bookstore.
They are the sort of people who regularly buy books for $10 and discover that they're worth $1,000.
They regularly buy books for $500 and sell it for $1,000, or buy it for $10 and sell it for $20.
They tend to know about as much as they knew about the book.
You bring it in, and they look it up in a few... They don't have a huge reference library.
They look up in a few places.
They see what seems to be a fair price.
They pay you half of that, and they put it out on the shelves at that.
They've never...
You know, it hasn't gone back in the back room and six months later after it's been fully researched, it appears.
That to me, now they may be selling the book for too little.
Of course, they may be sometimes paying too much.
But that seems to me it's an honest way of doing business.
One can't know everything.
So when I trash these people for being stupid, which many booksellers are, you know, I recognize it's a business and you cannot know everything.
And I think Moe's represents a level of scrupulousness, honesty, learning within the sort of general second-hand thing, which is...
admirable and could be imitated by many others.
But, you know, it's a big firm where there must be 15 employees, maybe even 20, and you've got to have some sort of corporate ethos.
This is the way we do it.
So you get these people who, you know, you pay $10 for a $20 book.
Just do it.
And the downside is you have some slightly mindless people occasionally, and there are certain sort of books which they ought to buy and they don't because they're
They have their little sort of books that they sell.
I mean, they're aiming at what, to my mind, is a slightly stupid customer, sort of typical 18-year-old undergraduate.
It's not as though they won't have an intelligence.
But you look at the difference between that and Black Oat, which I despise.
Well, I shouldn't say that.
He's a much greedier person.
But he has better books.
But, of course, the reason he has better books is because they're all protectively priced.
Mose never has quite as good books as he does because they're always being sold.
A good book arrives there in three months.
What's that?
Mose, huh?
M-O-E-S.
Mose himself was like Chernofsky.
He knew something about paperbacks, and that was about it.
But he had employees who knew more than he did.
And I'm not saying it's the pearl of bookshops, but as a way of a corporate ethos, we do it this way.
They have money behind them.
They have a big shop.
They realize that if you can have a fast turnover, see, they give trade to people.
And if you've got trade in a place and there are never any new books, who wants to have trade?
If you have trade and there are always new books, you think, well, I'll trade my books in and I'll be able to find something wonderful.
If I don't find it now, I'll go back in a week and the stock will be different.
So they have trucks that people, book trucks, they have to shelve anything.
Where are they?
And they're right out on Telegraph.
So they, you know, of course, if you have trade, you don't invest capital in these books.
And so...
It's a very sensible way.
And you can play with the IRS too, which is interesting.
Well, I'm not sure how much they're able to do it nowadays.
But yes, obviously there are no codes as to what they paid for it in the book.
They must have a set value of the stock, which is probably fair.
They've always got books on their shelves.
I'm not writing about that in any way.
So it's interesting.
You largely buy from booksellers and you sell
in great measure to booksellers.
That's right.
90% of my books are bought from booksellers.
Is that a paradox in any way?
No.
Booksellers are your best customers.
Yeah, but you're recognizing something in a book that another bookseller hasn't recognized, certainly enough to justify your purchasing it and being able to sell it for a profit to another bookseller.
A lot of people could not imitate my style of doing it.
Obviously, leaving intellect aside,
How can you leave intellect?
No, but I'm just saying there's a program for if I wrote a book as to how to sell, how you can sell books.
I don't necessarily, you know, you have to then leave.
Well, at Moe's they leave intellect largely.
Well, that's Moe's.
That's Moe's and this is... Yeah, well, I understand, but I'm trying not to... Obviously, I have no disciples.
No one else sells books in this way.
You need to ally it to a certain manner of living, which I was...
explaining when you asked how my wife and family to support.
I don't make very much money.
But living here...
It's a good source of supply.
Berkeley has a huge number of books, although people on the East Coast would think, in California, there's hardly anything, because they're thinking about a few overpriced booksellers with a few.
And there isn't a huge number of 19th century books.
The perception of the East Coast might say, 18th century.
How could there possibly be any 18th century stuff?
But if you compare the bookshops, the books post-1950, because there's at least some intellectual life in Berkeley, it's vast.
So you look at Harvard or Yale.
Look at the bookshops right around Harvard or Yale.
They're pitiful, pitiful compared to here.
There's nothing in Harvard Square that excites me.
Yeah, there's absolutely nothing.
Where is this one?
Oh, right.
You need one of those.
You can only stay for two hours without being.
We have little slips for guests.
Yale is even worse.
I mean, it's Bill Rees, great books and stuff, but there's no second-hand.
If you look at the number of second-hand bookshops in Berkeley, I mean, Moe's, Peter Howard, I mean, there are easily 750,000 second-hand books.
Well, I shouldn't tell you... But you have to have known Peter for an enormous amount of time.
I buy easily from Peter.
But, of course, I'm not trying to buy modern first editions.
I don't expect him to sell his first edition of Ulysses that he's already paid $50,000 for for $51,000.
Peter is deceptive.
I think Peter is quite remarkable, too.
He's built an enormous amount of booksellers.
You have to remember that stuff on the floor.
It's spectacular.
I feel like I've been in there, but I have never physically been in there before this morning.
We've talked dozens of times.
This is my fourth trip to Berkeley this week.
I'm here.
about living here is that food is amazingly cheap, even if you don't get wine cheaply from your neighbors.
You know, we're within the farmer's markets, and we're within 20 miles of things that have just been picked this morning.
It's hardly been crated in, and food is incredibly cheap, and the quality.
I mean, the East Coast is just, you know, especially in the winter, I mean, you've got these horrible things, and the rest of Europe, all of England, is just full of... Yeah, food costs almost nothing.
I only eat tomatoes in the summertime, and we can get them fresh from our local farmers.
And, you know, if you are married to a fairly good cook and have cheap ingredients, you can live on almost nothing, and I don't, you know, we don't travel very much.
A lot of these expenses, you know, by the way, no computer...
no television set, we don't go out a great deal.
There are all these no fancy clothes.
There are a lot of these expenses that Americans seem to think are absolutely essential to life.
And that count for, you know, $10,000, $15,000 a year.
You can actually, also if you're a bookseller and your chief interest is books, everything you do is tax deductible.
You know, I subscribe to all the bibliographies on the site.
Well, of course, you know, if anyone ever questioned it, I'd say, well, you know, just here's a sheet with my catalogs.
Look at what I quote.
I thought it's like a far better case to make for using my reference library than almost any bookseller, because I actually footnote things which, well... Every single book I buy, every newspaper I buy, every magazine I buy, is fully, I deduct 100%.
I don't care if it's, you know, The New Yorker or any subscription that my wife subscribes to, or even...
pay with my business check.
Yeah, well, it's perfectly legitimate.
Tell me it's not, you know, anything that gives me an idea or anything that gives me a footnote.
You mentioned this guy, the 20,000 books.
Before I forget, you know, I didn't know that reference there.
Oh, Mark Patterson.
Yeah, that's new to me, and I've heard that.
He said that's famous.
Not a famous, Mark.
I'm sure it's probably in, if you look up in the index to, like, Holbrook, Jackson's, and Naomi's Bibliomania, I'm sure.
I'm going to have a chapter on reading in here.
which is why Tilly was remarkable the other night, because this is a woman who had never finished high school, and it's totally a product of her reading.
I did an interview with Maurice Sendak a couple of weeks ago.
I love Maurice Sendak.
Totally a product of the books that he's read, and Stephen Jay Gould, who I've interviewed.
You know, I mean, it's kind of got a variety of voices.
See, those are instances of what I was saying.
You know, they've learned to read, and they have some curiosity.
And anyone whose opinions are worth hearing or can think can proceed from that.
We always want these institutional fixes for things and trying to homogenize everything.
We can create a standard product out of the American high school.
And we've gone in this direction of multiculturalism, which is just, again, it's sort of lowest common denominator, God-given.
In other words, you don't have to do anything.
You are Armenian culture.
It seems to me that if we simply, you know, we'll recognize genuine diversity in people, like some people are a lot more intelligent than others, or some people have some interests that others don't have.
And I think my own, when I was saying I would leave intellect out of it, I do think certainly to have an opinion in intellect is useful.
It is perfectly possible, though, to sell books with a degree of cunning, which most businessmen do have, and a decent memory, which of course you have to have,
and having put a fair amount into your brain.
And I tend, well, there's another quotation you could perhaps remember.
It's said of, well, you should have to look this book up.
It's by R.W.
Chapman.
Chapman is the editor of Jane Austen's letters and of the editor of the earlier edition of Samuel Johnson's letters.
He worked for Oxford University Press, Cardinal Press for years.
He died about 1960.
and wrote books himself.
He wrote a volume called, I think it's like Essays in Macedonia, or it's his first book, about 1919.
It collects in it an essay he wrote called Portrait of a Scholar, which also appears, that's the easiest way to find it, otherwise it's an account of Ingram Bywell.
More information than I need.
I have the book in here.
Bywater was the Bywater and Sotheby professorship of Greek at Oxford.
Bywater was a very learned scholar and a great book collector.
His wife had money, and would buy books as presents for him.
But he also had, and no children.
Anyway, Chapman, this portrait of scholars, beautifully written, deftly sketched,
It's my notion of the game.
Patterson, of course, had some problems.
The personality of the game was a very learned man with a brain.
See, you do have to distinguish intellect and learning, which people often don't bother to do.
There are many, I can name a few, booksellers who are very learned and really have no intellect at all.
You would find these inspired idiots, some of these Welsh, you know, Roberts, who was the great linguist around 1820, knew, you know, 75 language, but couldn't say anything in any of them.
It was a complete, you know, idiot savant sort of linguist.
Bywater and Patterson are both very learned men.
And this is a portrait where, you see, Chapman also collected books, usually rather dog-eared copies.
It's a catalog of his library just published as Library of a Scholar, probably echoing this thing.
Percy Muir, Elkin Matthews, about 1945, is a lot of 18th century books.
It's Chapman's libraries or turnouts.
It's a wonderfully sketched account of not only a scholar's life, but the position that books fill in that.
What's the title, Library of a Scholar?
It's Portrait of a Scholar.
Okay, you just said Library of a Scholar.
Yeah, Portrait of a Scholar, I'm sorry.
It's this thing, it's in this Essays in Macedonia, I think.
If we remember, I can show it to you before you read.
But it has some, because Chapman himself was a scholar and used antiquarian books, had some notion of how books could be used in a learned context.
And I'm always very interested in
scholarly methodology.
And I have a little hole down there that you came down.
It's nothing but biographies of scholars and naturalists.
And there must be at least 2,000 of them.
And you've read them all, I'm sure.
No.
I do think most books, there are books to read through.
There are books which you spent half an hour dipping into.
You check the index.
You check the table of contents.
You sample through it so that you've got a grasp of what's in there.
And you can then... And how it can help you when you need it.
How it can help you later.
And I think, you know, obviously I have 30,000 books.
And the fact is, of course, many of the books I read aren't the books I own.
They're books I borrow from the library.
Well, no, the 30,000 books, this is not stock for sale.
This is your personal library.
No, I have 6,000 for sale in the attic.
Okay.
I haven't taken any of the attic.
And I have maybe, it's probably only 25,000, 28,000.
Well, that's... It's a substantial number.
But, you know, with reference... 50,000 of yours, then.
Yeah.
But with reference books, of course,
I mean, there are many a reference book with D&B.
I haven't read the whole D&B.
You know what's in it.
You use it when you have it.
And you need, well, Calderon, what I was saying was the book collector who said, you know, it's unwise to have a wife and family if you want to collect books.
He points out there was a, he wrote, he's a very outspoken scholar who publishes in English but largely abroad.
And with this modern technology where you provide camera-ready copy to some German publisher, he never edits it.
So Calderon's wonderful account, I think,
of life.
He was a grad student at Harvard in classics in the 1950s, of sort of internecine warfare in the Harvard Classics Department in the 50s.
It was printed in some sort of best script.
You print quaderni di studi classici in Bologna or something.
You know, Calder's Friends, I got an off-print of something.
Calder's Friends will get a free off-print from him.
A few classicists to read Italian classical journals will see it.
Otherwise, this sort of
time bomb, anti-Harvard time bomb, will be completely unknown to anyone.
Do you mind if I take your picture?
Certainly.
Go ahead, just keep talking.
I just don't want any surprises.
No, no, I think, are you in, should I be in the line?
No, I like it.
Just keep talking.
Anyway, Calder points out that if you have Polyvosova, which is the
German classical dictionary of classical antiquities in about 100 volumes.
It's very expensive to have it because it costs $10,000.
He claims that if you own it, you are more likely to cite it, which is perfectly true.
And that's the same with the NUC.
I've got it right here, so I've got no excuse to just walk in.
It's easier to use than microfiche or anything.
It's quicker than online.
So...
I know this is a distraction.
No, it's all right.
So I think books are very useful to have one's own copies of reference books on the shelf, but you again don't need to have actually looked at it.
Anyway, what I was about to say about... You really have five times as many books of your own than you have for sale, which I've never heard of such a... Well, you know, Barney Rosenthal and I buy as to quantity.
Barney has, I would say, about 8,000 reference books and maybe 400 books for sale.
Of course, they're all incunables or manuscripts.
So his stock is much more valuable than my 6,000.
But I would say his proportion is even more extreme.
In fact, he often says the stock exists to support the reference library.
It is true not a lot of people have as many reference books as mine.
Do you subscribe to that for yourself?
Of course.
Well, where do you get your greatest satisfaction daily?
Reading books on my own.
I would quit book selling tomorrow if I could afford it.
And I wouldn't need to have too much extra money to do it.
You know, an income of $20,000 a year out of stocks or something, I would quit tomorrow.
Your income is less than that?
No, it's about that.
$20,000.
But you see, I should point out the number of... I can use that figure, you don't mind.
So he's writing this new problem, and he said to me, finally he's on Chapter 14, he's almost done with the problems, and he...
but he'd spent the previous day and a half of solving one of these problems himself.
You know, you invent the problem, and then you have to give the complete solution showing your work.
And I felt that my father, who's been doing classical electrodynamics for 50 years, takes a day and a half.
I mean, pity the poor graduate student.
And yet this was said without any notion of this might be rather too difficult.
I was going to tell you another tale of a person who's now making a lot of money in computers, but he originally came as a physics graduate student here
And he said, he was rather cocky about himself.
He said he arrived in a first-year physics grad student, head state, my father's course taught by my father here.
He said, I arrived in that class thinking I was Einstein, and I left realizing I was nothing.
And he dropped out.
So there is that, obviously, it's, I think, an astonished, you could say, Scottish Calvinist severity, which, you know, the American way of life is just this,
I mean, when I say Scottish Calvin, I mean, we're Canadian by birth, but Ontario was 90% Scottish emigrants, and it certainly preserves a fair amount of ethnocentric way of judging things.
You come up to America, particularly California, where it's all just sort of anything goes, low standards for everything, and that's also time.
At any rate, University of Illinois is a superb library, and better than Berkeley's.
and far the most largest circulation of anything I've done.
Fifty-few, right?
Fifty-few.
Well, you know, the happy few of Stendhal.
Again, it sounds arrogant to say.
It's not as though I'm meaning to be... The happy few, the happy few, the band of brothers.
That's Shakespeare.
Well, Stendhal, though, I used to dedicate, he was one of the vague...
he used it as an epigraph.
It was one of his slightly fractured English, but Stolendhal was always claiming he was writing for the happy few or for posterity or something.
And anyway, I'm not out to convert anyone who doesn't want to be converted, but it seems, you know, I do admit I also have a tendency in my conversation, unlike some people, to actually give you the citation.
I have a fairly good memory, so I can tell you where I've read it.
I don't just say, you know, he knew nothing that he didn't
that wasn't worth learning and say, well, gee, I sort of heard it somewhere.
Because, of course, I tend to think my interlocutor possibly is as interested in looking up as myself.
I found, I've educated myself largely by looking up footnotes.
You get a book, and you find it, and if it's a decent book, that person has presumably read and assimilated the literature on the subject, and therefore you don't, it's not like the Internet where these giant catalogs, you know, I pity these poor students typing in on the computer trying to find a book on Chicano studies or something,
far better to find the rough call number.
Nicholson Baker will tell you this.
Get the rough call number, get the book, find out what looks to be the most valuable, check the bibliography and footnotes of that.
You've got it selected down.
The dreadful thing with modern computerization of it is you notice this again and again.
People have footnotes that are books they haven't even read because you can download somebody else's database and you get these huge lists of books which may be absolute rubbish.
They may be completely irrelevant.
There are things in the data, I saw the reading of it,
book on the history of academies of art published by some Dutchman and not a subject that's greatly been written on so I try to keep up with all the literature on it and they had through their search of their database they had